README.md, before:

# AssEmbly [![.NET](https://github.com/TollyH/AssEmbly/actions/workflows/dotnet.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/TollyH/AssEmbly/actions/workflows/dotnet.yml)

A custom processor architecture and assembly language implemented in .NET

Go to the [release page](https://github.com/TollyH/AssEmbly/releases/latest) for executable and reference manual downloads. The included reference manual serves as a detailed guide on writing programs in the language.

See the VSCode extension for AssEmbly here: <https://github.com/TollyH/AssEmbly-VSCode>

---

**Copyright © 2022–2024  Ptolemy Hill**

**With the exception of files in the Documentation folder, this repository is licensed under GPLv3. The full license text can be found in the LICENSE file, or at <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html>**

**The files in the Documentation folder are licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. To view a copy of this license, see the LICENSE file located within the Documentation folder, or visit <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/>**

Commit message:

Build and deploy HTML docs in workflow

README.md, after:

# AssEmbly [![Build and Test .NET](https://github.com/TollyH/AssEmbly/actions/workflows/dotnet.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/TollyH/AssEmbly/actions/workflows/dotnet.yml) [![Build and Deploy Docs](https://github.com/TollyH/AssEmbly/actions/workflows/static.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/TollyH/AssEmbly/actions/workflows/static.yml)

A custom processor architecture and assembly language implemented in .NET

Go to the [release page](https://github.com/TollyH/AssEmbly/releases/latest) for executable and reference manual downloads. The included reference manual serves as a detailed guide on writing programs in the language.

See the VSCode extension for AssEmbly here: <https://github.com/TollyH/AssEmbly-VSCode>

---

**Copyright © 2022–2024  Ptolemy Hill**

**With the exception of files in the Documentation folder, this repository is licensed under GPLv3. The full license text can be found in the LICENSE file, or at <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html>**

**The files in the Documentation folder are licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. To view a copy of this license, see the LICENSE file located within the Documentation folder, or visit <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/>**
